1. SYSTEM OVERVIEW

1.1 INTRODUCTION

 The Radiography Parameters defined in this machine are based on Human Anatomy. This is
 reason why this machine is known as APR (Anatomical Programmed Radiography Machine).

There are different keys to define the Body Part to be exposed and depending on the defined Part
 by operator, machine it-self set the parameters depending on the built of patient and Screen
 Speed combination available for Exposure.

 Operator can choose manual mode and can select their own parameters for exposures

 Allengers 100 is a Diagnostic X-Ray generator, which caters to the general requirements of
 Radiography. This generator is also available in other options like Fluoroscopy and Spot
Filming. This equipment can be used with following combinations of stands and tables

STANDS:

Counter balanced mobile stand (CBM)- Incase of Machines with Radiography only

Allengers 100 X-Ray generator is ideally suited for Chest/ Extremities/ Skull/ Abdomen anc
other routine examinations.

This unit incorporates State - of - the- Art technology and is designed keeping in mind the
diverse requirements of the Radiologists. It is a Full Wave Rectified Unit (Two Pulse) and
consists of Control Panel & Self contained Tube Head Unit with manual collimator.

This machine is Type Approved for Electrical, Mechanical and Radiation Safety Standards
(vide IS: 7620) from the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board (AERB), Govt. of India, thus making
it entirely safe from the Radiation Hazards.

    
                                                          System Overview
                                                1.       Column Cover
The System consists of the following:           3        Column
                                                         Pin for Vertical Carriage
                                                5.       Tube Head
                                                          Tube Head Hanger
                                                6.      Tube Head Rotational Lock
                                                7.      Vertical Carriage Locking Knob
                                                8.      LBD (Collimator)
                                                9.        Compensator Switch & MCB
2                                               10.      Control
6                                               11.     E Ring for Foot Lock Rod
                                                12.     Base
                                                13.      Foot Lock for Machine movement
     5  4                                       14.      Control Handle
                                               15.      Panel
                                                16.      Hand Switch
                                                17.      Fuses, Main Supply, Ext. Cord,
                                                18.       Bucky & Tube Head Connections
                                         20     19.       Digital Voltmeter
                                                          Tube Head Rotational Knob
                                         19     20.       Vertical Carriage

                                         18

                                                          16

                                                                15
     8       9

                                                                  14

10

13

12

    
                                                                System Overview

1.2     TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS

ALLENGERS-100 (APR          100mA, Full Wave Rectified X-Ray Generator with Stationary
LCD)               Anode X-Ray Tube and LCD Display
                           Anatomical Programmed Radiography (APR): For quick and fine
                    selection of radiographic parameters for optimum image quality.
OUTPUT             8.0 KW
mA STATIONS         100 mA, 50 mA and 25 mA
KVP RANGE           40 to 100KVP in Steps of 1 KVP/Step.
TIMER              Controller based electronic timer having range from 0.01 to 8.0 sec
                   in 21 steps.
                               Anatomical Programmed Radiography helps the operator in
                      such a way that by just selecting the Patient Size and Body Part
                      to be X-Rayed the KVP and mAs are automatically selected
                             Attractive and Ergonomically designed feather Touch Panel
                                   control panel having LCD display which displays the
                           parameters like mA, mAs, KVP, Screen type, Bucky selection,
                      selected body part description.
                            Laminated Membrane switches are provided for mA Selection.
CONTROL                          KVP Selection, mAs selection, Ready, X-Ray S/W, Bucky
                      Selection S/W and M/C ON-OFF S/Ws.
                      Provided with a voltage compensator switch for adjusting the I/P
                             voltage of machine to 230V. Adjustment can be made in the
                      range 190V to 260V & for this a Digital voltmeter is provided to
                     display the input voltage.
                             A Booster X-mer is provided to stabilize and maintain the
                     filament voltage.
                        A hand S/W with five meter length retractable cord is provided
                      for operating the equipment from distance position.
                     Automatic trip off overload Circuit Breaker
OVERLOAD             Ready & X-Ray indicators
PROTECTION &         Fuses for all circuits are provided in the machine
SAFETY FEATURES            Electronic overload system does not allow Machine to select
                      parameters which are out of range according to X-ray tube rating
                      chart
                      Self-contained Tube Head containing Stationary Anode X-Ray Tube.
                           Compact Heavy Duty Full Wave Rectified H.T. Transformer and
                             High Voltage Silicon Rectifiers etc. all oil immersed and
TUBE HEAD            hermetically sealed. Tube head can be tilted 360 Degree with full
                   flexibility for use in operation theatres and in ward for bed-side
                   radiography.
                    A multi-leaf collimator is provided
POWER                          230 Volts, Single Phase, AC supply. Max. Allowable Line
REQUIREMENT         Regulation ± 10%. (with line resistance less than 0.4 ohm.)

                                       
System Overview

1.3 DESCRIPTION OF CONTROL

Operator Console of Allengers-100 consists of following keys as shown:

BODY PART  SIZE  VIEW    Allengers
LOWER-EXT BABY   AP

A    040 002 50 L K4 VER          B

KV  mAs                        mA  L

12    VIEW                  10     8    KV    6

13    BODY PART    SIZE     9      7    mAs    5

POWER    EXPOSURE

2    D    3  4

    
                                                                      System Overview

    1.4 DESCRIPTION OF CONTROL KEYS

    1.MACHINE ON SWITCH O

    This switch is used to turn ON the machine.

    2. MACHINE OFF SWITCH

    This switch is used to turn OFF the machine. Indicator along this switch glows when
    power is available to the machine but machine is in OFF condition.

    3.READY SWITCH

     This switch is used to Boost the Filament

     4. EXPOSURE SWITCH

    This switch is used to make an Exposure. For exposure, first press the Ready Switch and
    then Exposure Switch Simultaneously

    5mA SELECTION SWITCH               mA

    This Switch is used to select the mA. By pressing this switch mA station will be changed.

     BUCKY SWITCH

     This switch is used to energize the Horizontal or Vertical Bucky.

     7. mAS INCREASE & DECREASE SWITCHS       mAs

    These switches are used to Increase / Decrease the mAs. mAs can be Increased or
    Decrease from 1 to 200 mAs

    Note: - kV and mAs Increase Decrease switch does not work in the APR Mode.

    8. KV INCREASE & DECREASE SWITCH  KV

This switch is used to Increase / Decrease KV. KV can be Increased or Decrease from
   40 to 100 KV in steps of 1 KV each and the display of KV is shown on the display
    above these switches.

            
System Overview

 9.PATIENT SIZE SELECTION SWITCH      SIZE

 This switch is used to select the body size of the patient i.e.
 LARGE/MEDIUM/SMALL/BABY

 10.AP/LAT/OBL  VIEW

  This switch is used to change the view of patient body part to be exposed

  11. DENSITY SWITCH

  This switch is used to select the screen speed combinations like 200 speed/400 speed/800
speed.

12. APR  APR
When we switch ON the machine then by default machine is in the APR Mode. By
  pressing this switch the machine will switch to Manual Mode from APR Mode.

  13. BODY PART SELECTION SWITCHES        BODY PART

  These switches are used to select the Body Area of which X-Ray is to be taken i.e.
Lower-EXT, Hand, Pelvis & Spine, Abdomen, DOR-Spine, Chest, Shoulder, CEP-Spine,
Skull.

 A)THIS SWITCH IS NOT USD IN THIS MACHINE

THIS SWITCH IS NOT USD IN THIS MACHINE  OE

BODY PART                               SIZE  VIEW
LOWER-EXT BABY                                AP
DISPLAY    040 002                      50 L K4 OFF

           KV  mAS                      mA        -ti-
         
                                                    System Overview

                                                    Ready

 READY/EXPOSURE INDICATOR                           Exposure
 When we press ready switch from Panel or Hand Switch ready indicator (green) is
glowing and when Exposure switch is pressed Exposure indicator (yellow) is glowing.
DIGITAL PANEL VOLTMETER            230

This meter is used to show the machine Input Supply.

F) COMPENSATOR SWITCH (ON BACKSIDE OF CONTROL)

The Compensator switch is provided at the back side of control which is having 12 Steps
and is used to adjust large variations in incoming voltage from 190V to 260V.

                                                                                Exposure
 G) HAND SWITCH (MOUNTED ON CONTROL PANEL)                                      Ready

 This is two-position switch. When switch is pressed in first step, Ready function is
activated and when this switch is pressed further, X-Ray functions is activated.

FUSES FOR SAFETY:
Fuse No.  Function                 Rating           Location
  F1      Line Fuse          25 Amps.
 F2       Filament Supply          4 Amps.          On Rear of Control
  F3      Motherboard Card         2 Amps.          Panel
  F4      Light Beam Diaphragm     4 Amps.
          (Collimator) Fuse

 16 Amp MCB is provided for over current protection.

LBD LIGHT ON SWITCH (ON LBD)
This is Push to ON type switch. When it is pressed bulb gets ON and remains ON for 1
minute. After 1 minute bulb gets OFF automatically.

    
    System Overview

     1.5 POWER SUPPLY REQUIREMENTS

     The electrical power requirements for Allengers 100 X-Ray system are as follows:

    Input Voltage: Single Phase 230 V AC with regulation of ± 10 %
    Input Frequency: 50/60 Hz.
    Current Rating: 15 Amps.
    Line Resistance: 0.4 Ohms as per IS 7620 (Part 1)

    It must be ensured that at the power socket, the right pin of socket is connected to Phase
    (line) and left to the Neutral. Also, voltages between following points should be checked:

    Phase & Neutral:    230 V AC

    Neutral & Earth:    0 V AC

    Phase & Earth:      230 V AC

    EARTHING:

It is strongly recommended that independent earthing (at zero potential) is available in
  the power socket in the Room where the machine is to be used. Proper earthing not only
    enhances the performance & reliability of the equipment but increases safety for the
    operating staff as well.

    1.6 ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS:

    Storage
    Temperature 0 to 40°C
    Humidity  Maximum 90% at 30°C

    Operating Conditions:

    Temperature 10° to 40°C
    Humidity  Upto 75%

            
Unpacking Instructions

2. UNPACKING INSTRUCTIONS

   Optimum care is taken while packing the machine so that the machine must reach to the final
       destination without any scratches and must be free from any transportation damages. The
machine is first packed in Polythene sheet & then further packing is done either using
      foam/thermocole sheet. The outer carton could be of cardboard box or wooden ply packing.
        The wooden boxes are packed with the nails and metallic strips wound with the nuts and
bolts.

The Service Engineer should study the following safety points before installing the machine
at the customer's place:

!Utmost care should be taken while unpacking the boxes.

 Always make sure that while unpacking the boxes the items contained in them do not
        get damaged.

                   While removing the screws, bolts or nuts from the boxes, make sure that the
        instrument used for removing the screws, bolts or nuts do not penetrate in the box and
        subsequently damage the contents of the box.

        Extra Care should be taken while opening the heavier items as any sort of
        carelessness can cause injury to the person handling the item.

Follow the procedure below to open the packing:

 (i)      Remove the metallic strips by opening the nuts and bolts with the spanners.
 (ii)     Remove the wooden packing from the sides by removing the nails. Care must be
          taken so that the contents of the box are not hit accidentally.
 (iii)           Remove the thermocole packed material from the cardboard boxes after removing
          the packing tapes used to close the boxes (wherever applicable) and then remove
          thermocole packing sheet and polythene sheet by removing packing tape.

        The unpacked parts must not be kept on the floor and can be kept on the packing sheets
  removed earlier to avoid any scratches on the parts and to keep them clean. Do not touch the
parts with dirty hands or rub them with a piece of cloth to avoid any dirt marks on the parts.

       Check the contents of Packing as per Packing List along with the machine and report any
damages or short shipments if any in prescribed format to Head Office.

    
                                      Infrastructural Requirements

    3. INFRASTRUCTRAL REQUIREMENTS

    3.1 SUPPLY AND WIRING REQUIREMENTS

    Input Supply:

     1 Phase 230 V AC ± 10%
     50/60 Hz.
     Line Resistance of 0.4 Ohms

Note: The power line must not have a line resistance of more than 0.4
Ohms. In case the line resistance is more than O.4 Ohms, the output of
    machine may be reduced.

    3.2 EARTHING REQUIREMENT

    It is strongly recommended that independent earthing at zero potential is available at
    Mains switch in the X-Ray Room where machine is to be installed. Independent earthing
    not only enhances the performance and reliability of the equipment but it is also safe for
    the operating staff as well.

            
    Infrastructural Requirements

    3.3 SUGGESTED ROOM PLAN (For Fixed Installations only)

    OPEN AREA

    CHEST STAND

WINDOWS ABOVE    TABLE
 2.5 m HEIGHT
    ALLOWED

                 PROTECTIVE      DOOR

    TUBE STAND    BARRIER    (LEAD LINED)

CONTROL
 PANEL

                     CHANGE
    CASSETTE PASS    ROOM
    BOX

    DOOR
    DARK ROOM
             LIGHT TRAP
    AIR                DOOR
CONDITIONER

SIMPLEST LAYOUT OF X-RAY ROOM AND DARK ROOM
(FOR ROUTINE PROCEDURES IN A SMALL HOSPITAL)

            
Infrastructural Requirements

3.3.1 X-Ray Room Layout Requirements

1. Location of X-Ray Installation:

     The room housing diagnostic X-Ray unit equipment should be located as far away as
     feasible from areas of high occupancy and general traffic, such as maternity and
 paediatric wards and other departments of the hospital that are not directly related to
 radiation and its use.

Layout:

  The layout of room in X-ray department should aim at providing integrated facilities
      so that handling of X-ray equipment and related operations can be conveniently
   performed with adequate protection. The number of doors for entry to the X-ray room
        should be kept to the minimum. The doors and passages leading to the X-ray
    installation should permit safe and easy transport of equipment and non-ambulatory
    patients. The dark room should be so located that the primary X-ray beam cannot be
 directed on it.

Room Size:

          The room housing an X-ray equipment must be spacious enough to permit
     installation, use and servicing of equipment with safety and convenience for he
  operating personnel, the servicing personnel and the patient. The room size must not
 be less than the 180 sq. ft. for a general purpose X-ray machine

4 Shielding:

 Appropriate structural shielding shall be provided for the walls, the ceiling and the
   floor of the X-ray room so that doses received by workers occupationally exposed to
     the radiation and the members of the public are kept to a minimum and shall not
   exceed the annual effective dose equivalent limits of 50 mSv and 1 mSv respectively.
   The doors of an X-ray room shall provide the same shielding as that of the adjacent
  walls incase persons are likely to be present in front of them when the X-ray unit is
    energized. Appropriate shielding must be provided for the dark room to ensure that
    undeveloped X-ray films stored in it will not be exposed to more than an air kerma
 rate of 10 uGy per week (approximately 1.13 mR per week)

5. Openings and Ventilation:

 Unshielded openings, if provided in an X-ray room for ventilation or natural light etc.
  must be located above a height of 2 meters from the ground/floor level outside the X-
ray room.

    
Infrastructural Requirements

6Illumination Control:

 Room housing fluoroscopy equipment must be so designed that adequate darkness
 can be achieved conveniently when desired in the room. A suitable red light must be
 provided in the room for the use of radiologist after dark adaptation.

7. Equipment Layout:

 The X-ray equipment must be installed in such a way that in normal use the useful
 beam is not directed towards control panel, doors, windows or areas of high
 occupancy. The useful beam should preferably be directed towards unoccupied areas
 of high occupancy. Sufficient area should be left around the X-ray table for safe and
 free movement of equipment/trolley, radiology staff and service personnel.

8 Control:

In case of diagnostic X-ray equipment operating up to 100KV, the control must be
 installed in a separate control room located outside but contiguous to the X-ray room
 and provided with appropriate shielding, direct viewing and oral communication
facilities between the operator and the patient.

Waiting Areas:

 Patient waiting area must be provided outside the X-ray room.

10. Warning Light And Placard:

 A suitable warning signal such as a red light must be provided at a conspicuous place
 outside the X-ray room and kept 'ON' when the X-ray unit is in use to prevent
 inadvertent entry of persons not connected with the examination. An appropriate
 warning placard must also be posted outside the X-ray room.

    
    Infrastructural Requirements

    3.4 AIR CONDITIONING

 Although it is not mandatory to use this equipment in air-conditioned environment but
maintaining a room temperature in the range of 25 to 30 C helps in providing sufficient
    cooling to the unit and thus maintaining proper functioning and reliability of equipment

    3.5 ROOM LAYOUT APPROVAL FROM REGULATORY
        BOARD/BOARDS

    Note: PLEASE REFER TO YOUR COUNTRY'S RULES AND REGULATIONS AS
        APPLICABLE TO MEDICAL DIAGNOSTIC X-RAY EQUIPMENTS.

    We suggest you to strictly follow the safety standards as applicable in your country for safety
    from Electrical, Mechanical & Radiation related hazards.

    No X-Ray unit shall be commissioned unless the layout of the proposed X-Ray installation is
    approved by the competent authority.

            
                         Installation Procedure

4. INSTALLATION PROCEDURE

4.1 ASSEMBLY PROCEDURE

1. Take the base of the mobile unit and place it on the floor. The base is provided with the
four wheels, two fixed wheels on the front side and two rear wheels inside the base on its
backside. The backside wheels are steering wheels for the base movement.

Square Grooves for
Counter Weight

Foot Lock

2. Lock the base with the help of the mechanical foot operated break provided on the right
 hand side of the base (The position for locking and unlocking of the foot break is
 indicated near the break).

3. Open all the (12) screws fixed on the top of the base. Care must be taken that all the
 screws are kept on the safe place along with all the spring and the plane washers, as they
 will be required to fix different parts on the base.

4. Take the counter weight and clean this with a piece of cloth from all the sides and make
 sure that the rubber strips mounted on the top and bottom sides of the counter weight are
 extended a little out and the screws to fix these rubber strips are tightened properly
 (These rubber strips are fixed for the reason that when the weight moves inside the
 column, noise of the weight due to touching with internal sides of the column can be
 dampened). Take the steel ropes and fix one end of the steel ropes to the counter weight
with the help of the spanner or the adjustable spanner tightly.

    
Installation Procedure

Put the counter weight in square grooves.

     6.Take a long rope/ string and tie open ends (having bolts fixed on them) of steel ropes
        with this rope/ string properly. Now pass the steel ropes from the bottom side of the
        column so that open ends come out of the topside of the column.
7.Lift the column with the help of two people and put it on the counter weight which is
      placed in the square grove in the base and ensuring that the string and the steel ropes
           remain outside the top of the column. Make sure that the backside of the column is
towards the backside of the base and the front side of the column faces the front side of
  the base. Take care that that steel ropes don't fall back in the column by tying the string
properly.

2020                                                                   220

8. After placing the column on base over the counter weight properly, tight the eight bolts
        removed in step 3.

TIGHT THE EIGHT
BOLTS

    
Installation Procedure

9. Take the pulleys, spacers and the shaft. Make sure that the arrangement of spacers and
the pulleys are as shown in picture below.

20

10. Slide the vertical carriage inside the column as shown. Now take the steel ropes from the
top of the pulleys and remove the string tied to ends of steel ropes.

1 1. Tight the open end of the steel ropes to the threaded space provided on the top of the
vertical carriage. Make sure that the steel ropes do not overlap at any point and are
crossing over to their respective side pulleys.

    
Installation Procedure

12. Fix the column top cover with the help of two screws & then open the control cover by
opening the 8 screws.

Allengers    20

Tighten the screw
on both sides

13. Put the control on the base & tighten the four screws as removed during step 3.

Tighten the four
screws

14. Move the top panel upwards and remove 4 screws (2 on each side of control) used to fix
    control handle. Fix the Hand switch clamp on top panel side by holding the clamp as
20  shown and fixing 2 Nos. screws from inside the top panel.
    20
    20                                                                                    20

    
Installation Procedure

15. Fix the tube head hanger to the X-Ray tube head with the Allen key after sliding the
hanger on the blocks provided on the sides of the tube head

20    20₂

      16. Open the bolt and the washers from the tube head hanger.

       17. With the help of a person bring the Vertical carriage in the column down and lock it
       properly with the locking knob provided on the lower side of the vertical carriage. Make
      sure that the vertical carriage is still held by a person even after locking it properly.

    
                                                                       Installation Procedure

18. Insert the tube head hanger inside the hole with a bush provided in the front of vertical
       carriage and tight it with the bolt and the washers. Make sure that firstly the spring
    washer, then the bigger plane washer and then the smaller plane washer is inserted in the
        bolt. The washer arrangement is to make sure the free movement of the tube head in al
    the directions.

                   Tight the bolt and
                   washers

    19. Care has to taken while fixing the tube head that the Tiltometer i.e. the angle deflection
    meter fixed on the tube head must face the operator.

    20. Make the connection of tube head and tight the clamp.

    CLAMP FOR HOLD
    THE CABLE

            
    Installation Procedure

    21. Remove the four screws from the strips on the tube head provided to mount the LBD.

 22. Fix the LBD on top of the tube head with the four screws. While fixing the L.B.D care
must be taken that the switch fixed on the L.B.D. for the switching on the light bulb must
    face to the front i.e. towards the operator side for the convenient operations

    TIGHT THE
    FOUR SCREWS

    23. Tight the two screws (one on each side) for tighten the control top.

    TIGHT THE
    SCREW

    CONTROL TOP

    Control

            
Installation Procedure

4.2 INSTALLATION CHECKPOINTS

Column stand installation is vertical and not tilted
The column should be firmly fixed on the base
Foot lock of column is functioning
The steel wire ropes tension should be uniform
 Counter Weight Up/Down movement is not noisy
On moving the tube head, the counter weight does not make any sound
On moving up the vertical carriage to the uppermost position, the counter weight
doesn't make a thud sound and instead it rests on a rubber stopper
All screws are tight and are not loose

 The Tube Head is mounted on the Stand properly and is not tilted axially
 The LBD is mounted properly and is not tilted. X-Ray and light beam are aligned
 The movement of shutters of the LBD is smooth and the light intensity is good
The Up/Down Movement of the Tube is fully counter balanced
The movement of the pulleys is smooth and is functioning properly
The cover of the column is properly placed on top of it
Cross mark is fixed on the LBD

Locking knobs of vertical carriage are functioning properly

    
Installation Procedure

4.3 INTERCONNECTION OF VARIOUS ASSEMBLIES

Make the electrical connections of various assemblies as per inter connection details.

P              TS1-12
               MOV
N              TS1-11

E              TS1-10

MAIN SWITCH    TS1-1             F1
               TS1-2             F2

               TS1-3             mA

               TS1-4             GND

               TS1-5             P2

               TS1-6             P1

               TS1-7

               TS1-8             LBD SUPPLY

                                 TUBE HEAD
               TS2-4     230V              BUCKY SUPPLY

               TS2-5     OV                FOR TABLE

               TS2-6     230V              ELECTROMAGNET
                                           SUPPLY FOR TABLE
               TS2-7

               TS2-8     NOT USED

               TS2-9

               CONTROL

    
Installation Procedure

4.4 ASSEMBLY PROCEDURE
1After installation of tube stand as per their installation procedure, follow these steps:

2.Do electrical connections as follows:
  Note: A proper Earth connection must be available & all parts of X-Ray machine
  must be earthed.
  TS1-1 of Control to F1 of Tube Head
  TS1-2 of Control to F2 of Tube Head
  TS1-3 of Control to mA of Tube Head
  TS1-4 of Control to GND of Tube Head
  TS1-5 of Control to P2 of Tube Head
  TS1-6 of Control to P1 of Tube Head
 On the tube head, brass bolts are provided for the interconnections of the tube head and
 control. Each bolt is marked for connection to the control.

        ! Do not tighten the nuts on brass bolts with excessive force as they may break by
 applying extra force.

       3. Connect LBD supply from TS1-7 & 8 of Control. For this, wire with Male socket is
  provided. Connect open ends of this wire to control terminal strip as above in 4.3 and
  male socket into female socket on LBD.
  Terminal Strip TS1 is located on back plate inside control.

PRECAUTION TO BE TAKEN WHILE ASSEMBLING
A Gap between mA and Earth strip should be approximately 1 mm.
The Earth wire on the HV Transformer should be properly tightened
 All connections on the Tube Head should be firmly tightened

    
              Installation Procedure

4.5    FOR VOLTAGE (P1 & P2) AND LCD
       PROCEDURE
       BRIGHTNESS ADJUSTMENT.

MOTHERBOARD CARD ON TOP OF THE CONTROL

                                                                   LCD
                                                                   Brightness
PRAMRR                                                             (R7)

                                                          Variac
          Adjustment (R4)

1. After making all the connections switch ON the machine.
2. To adjust the brightness of LCD vary the preset R7 (If Required)
3.To change the P1-P2 vary the preset R4 (If Required)

    
                                                         Installation Procedure

4.6 INSTALLATION CHECKPOINTS

4.6.1 Control Panel
 All wiring inside the control is with proper thimbles and harnessed so that the wiring
  is away from wire wound resistors.
  Necessary Strain Relief (cable tie) etc. is fixed, so that, the wiring does not come out
  when pulled.
  No hole in the control is left open so that Rats & Mice should not enter the control.
 All meters are functioning properly.
 o
 Movement of all the Switches is smooth.

 0 Display is functioning properly and the intensity is uniform.
 Panel plate is clean and is free from scratches.
 Control's general appearance is tidy and clean.
 All covers are fixed properly and no screw is left loose

 4.6.2 Tube Head

 No Oil Leakage is observed.

  All wires are thimbled and fixed to terminals. Proper strain relief is used on wires sc
  as to avoid any disconnections.

4.6.3 General Checks
General appearance of machine is clean
  Machine parameters are calibrated properly
 Light & X-Ray beam matches.
Filter in the Tube head cover is present
  LBD doesn't move on handling with respect to Tube Unit.

    
KVP SETTING  RELAY  RELAY'S CONTACT LOCATION  Allengers 100
SSR  MA KVP VOL.  1RE1ON/OFF 12V/12A  A6
NO  2 RE2 READY 12V/6A  C5  RE1-A B1
1  25  100 245  X-RAY SSR 50A  B6  RE1-B A6
2  50  80  219  SSR 25A  RE1-C
100
3  60  212  SSR  RE2-B  80
NOTE  ADJUST THE R4 F  MA
MOTHERBOARD CARD  FUSE DETAIL & LOCATION  RE4-A  C4  0 BA  M  RE1-B
SET POINT  1 LINE 25A  RE6-A  RE6
1R7 LCD BRIGHTNESS SET  2 FIL.4A  RE5  NOT USE
R4 KVP VOLTAGE SET  3 MOTHER 2A  22  2  XIM  RE1
3 R12 MAX.TIME SET  4 LLBD 4A  8  1  J8 4s 3J9
MCB  3  OV(R)
TS 1-12  16A  ABS X-MER
LINE  25A  12V  J1-10  J2-10  ON/OFF SUPPLY 12V  5  2J4
F1  0  J1-1120J2-11  GNO  J4 6  3  J5  RE4
MOV  BEFORE ON  12V  J1-1  J2-1 RELAY SUPPLY 12V  V-BUCKY
250V  0  J1-2  J2-2.  OV(R)  5  7  H-BUCKY  RELAY CARD
TS 1-11  -12V  6  8  ON/OFF  5  OV(R)
NEUTRAL  TAP NO.  9  +12V(R)  BUZZER
26-7.5  J1-6  J2-6  +5V  J7 MOTHER  10  KVP UP  3  J2
 B  TS 1-10  RE1-A  25-0  J1-7  J2-7  11  RE2-B
TS 1-4  RE1-C  24-12.5  J1-8  J -8.1  BOARD  12  KVP DOWN
GND  23-0  J1-9  J2-91  +15V  CARD  NOT USE
VOLT  22-15.5  J1-3  W  J2-3  MA-1  (H-BUC.)TS 2-4
COMP  21-0  J1-4  J2-4G  MA-2  6  RE2-C
TCH  20-24.5  14A|  TS 1-7LBD SUPPLY  MA-3
20  FINE  19-0  TS 1-8 24V AC  FOR AUTO 20  J3 4  MA-4  8  TS 2-7
(S1)  18-260  OLTAGE  SV SUPPLY   K-MER  5  MA-5  J3  9-   20 (v-BUC.)
17-250  METER  J5  FILSEL  10
16-240  J6  J1  7  EXP.
15-235  2 8  LIGHT  8
RE5  RE6  14-230  H
SR-A  SSR-A  13-225  OV(R)
MICRO  12-220  RE2  COM. MA
SW  MICRO  11-215  NOT USE  25 MA
RC NET  SW  10-210  50MA
WORK  9-205  V1
 c  8-200  TS 2-6  100 MA
7-195
KVP  6-190  25  50100  RE2-A  JUMPER
MOTOR  5-185  470K/400V  TS1-4
4-180  KVP SENSE X-MER  TS1-3
3-175  0-12V X-MER  G
2-170  TS 2-5  750 OHM/150W  TS1-6  mA 20
AUTO  RE4-A  P1   P2
BOOSTER  X-MER  TS1-5
X-MER  10  120  F1

S2  R1 25 W W  470K/400V  TS1-1  F2
BOOSTER RESISTANCE  14A  TS1-2  L

 D
engers
: WIRING DIAGRAM FOR ALLENGERS 100
(APR-LCD)
DRG. NO.: E-464, R1  APPD

REV.  24-07-2010 TWO CAPACITORS 470K/40OV ADDED, FOR BUCKYSUPPLY & ELECTROMAGNET SUPPLY  24-07-2010  2K100710088-X  CHKD
DATE  REMARKS ON REVISION  CHKD  APPD  IMP. DATE  W.EF. MACHINE SR. NO  DRN  10-03-2010

Circuit Diagram & Circuit Explanation

6.1 CIRCUIT EXPLANATION

 1. Plug in the machine at 230V AC 50/60Hz (Single Phase Supply)
2.Supply 230 V AC will be available at TS1-12 & TS1-11.
 3. After pressing the ON Switch 0V supply will be available to RE1 Coil through K13
  relay NO contact & 12V will be available directly from J2-1.
4. When REl relay becomes ON all its Contacts will become short & RE1A, RE1C will
  become close and Line & Neutral will be available to further circuit.
5. This way OV P1 will be directly available at Tube Head terminals and similarly F2
  will be available directly through Booster X-Mer secondary
 6.Now by default Machine will become ON in APR mode.
7. Now when we Switch ON the machine filament voltage F1 will reach to Tube Head
  through the corresponding relay selection i.e. 25, 50 & 100
 8. Now on pressing Ready Switch our relay (K16) in Relay Card will become ON and
  its Contact will pass the 0V supply to RE2 Coil.
9. NO Contact (RE2A) in series with filament resistance gets closed and filament now
  boosted voltage.
  10. NO Contact (RE2C) connected in series with Bucky Supply gets closed & Bcuky
  Grid starts oscillating if Bucky Switch is selected in 'IN' Position.
  11. NO Contact (RE2B) in series RE4 gets closed.
  12. On pressing Ready Switch KVP Motor starts to adjust the actual KVP position for
  this our K14 or K15 Relay become ON which further makes RE5 & RE6 ON.
 13. Which further moves the motor either in forward or reverse direction.
  14. On pressing the X-Ray Switch Relay K1 become ON which makes the Relay RE4
  gets energized as RE2B is already closed.
 15. When RE4 gets energized RE4A becomes closed and supply P2 will be available at
  TS1-5, whereas P (0V) is available when we Switch ON the Machine.
  16. After pre selected time X-Ray signal from Motherboard Card J9-3 will be high &
  Relay K1 becomes OFF and our X-Ray terminates.

    
Calibration and Testing

7. CALIBRATION AND TESTING

 7.1 ENERGIZING THE EQUIPMENT

7.1.1 The equipment must be energized after ensuring that the input voltage is correct,
        earthing is connected to the equipment, all connections are correctly made, there are
        no loose connections and rating of fuses is correct.

      Wait for 5 minutes before exposure is initiated to ensure proper warm up of the
7.1.2
       equipment.

7.1.3  Check filament glow inside the Tube Head through its window.

7.1.4 Always start with low rated exposure at low kV& mAs and then gradually increase
       the factors.

 7.2 CARRYING OUT PRELIMINARY TESTS

 Once the machine is energized, check the following in equipment

7.2.1  No abnormal sound / sparking in the equipment.
7.2.2  No burning / overheating smell from equipment.
7.2.3   No fuse should blow.
7.2.4   Radiographic exposure should not initiate automatically.
7.2.5   Check that all displays i.e. mAS, KVP etc. glow at all time intervals selected and at
        all mA stations.

    
Calibration and Testing

7.3 CALIBRATING THE EOUIPMENT

7.3.1 Check the Overload Settings as follows:
      mA      KVP            mAs
      50     100             115 mAs
       100    80             15 mAs.
       100    60             85 mAs
      All Overload setting as per Micro Controller based

7.3.2         Check the mAs in mAs meter at all stations by making exposure at 70 KVP and 20
                mAs for 25 & 50 mA and for 100 mA, select 70 KVP on machine and check on kVp
          meter if kvp is + 5% then is OK, if very then adjust from Pot R4. Check the mAs on
        TS1-3&4 and adjust from 750 Ω/150W resistance.

             Separate bands are provided for 25, 50 & 100 mAs on resistance of 750 Ohms, 150
        Watts) mounted vertically near Variac. If mAs value is to be increased in mAs meter.
          then move the band for selected mAs station in downwards direction. If mA value is
        to be decreased then move the band for selected mAs station in upwards direction. If
       mA value is to be increased on all mA stations then move the common band upwards
       near the 100 mAs band.

    
Calibration and Testing

                 Auto
mA Adjusting     Transformer
Resistance
                 Booster
                 Transformer

                           0-12     ABS
                                    Transformer
                           Transformer
Check P1-P2 current as per following table. The value of P1-P2 current mentioned in
following table is approximate value of current that flows under normal operating conditions:

S. No.    mA Station  KVP  mAs      P1-P2 Current
  1           25  100      25         8.0 Amps.
  2  50      86            50         17.0 Amps.
  3  100     56            100      33.0 Amps.

7.3.3  Check the functioning of the Booster Transformer at following parameters:
        50 mA, 70 KVP, 50 mAs.
        Make an exposure at above factors. The filament supply should be stable during the
        Exposure. This voltage is noted down with the help of the calibrated Analog
       Multimeter between terminals 1-2 of TS1. If voltage is not stable during exposure
        across these terminals. Check the Capacitor on Booster Transformer.

                                       
                                                                 Calibration and Testing

7.3.4 Check L.B.D. Supply across TS1-7 & 8 terminals with calibrated digital multimeter.
 It should be within 24 ± 1 Volts.

7.3.5 Check Bucky Supply across TS2 terminals 4-5 and pressing Ready switch. It should
 be within 230 ± 10 Volts. For this purpose the Bucky switch should be at IN position.

7.3.6 Hand Switch is checked physically for its proper operation.

7.3.7 Check the filament voltage boosting between F1 and F2 by placing calibrated digital
 multimeter between TS12. Note down the reading of the Voltage initially and then
 note the voltage of the Filament pressing Ready switch.
 The Boosting should be about 50 + 10 Volts

7.3.8
The Radiation and the Optical Field of the Collimator is always factory adjusted but
     in case the adjustment gets disturbed then any shift in the X Axis can be adjusted with
       the help of the Front Adjusting Screw. Any shift in the Y Axis can be adjusted with
           the help of the Bulb. To check this select 50 mA, 60 KVP & 50 mAs. Place the
     Fluoroscent screen under the collimator. The X-Ray room should be made dark.
        Switch On the light field on collimator. Adjust the light field to fall on area of
     fluoroscent screen. Switch OFF the light of collimator and make exposure at selected
         factors in the dark X-Ray room. X-ray field must fall on the area of fluoroscent
      screen. If alignment of light beam and X-ray field is not matching then adjust either
     from front screw or bulb as required.

    
Calibration and Testing

UNLOCK  LOCK    UNLOCK  LOCK    Press to ON
                                Switch

Shutter Movement Knobs

20

Adjustment in Bulb for Shift in Y-axis

    
Calibration and Testing

 7.4 PROCEDURE FOR CARRYING OUT QA TESTS AS PER
 REGULATORY BOARD.

The aim of quality assurance (QA) tests in diagnostic radiology is to ensure good quality
 images with optimal doses. Images of poor quality will necessitate retakes and can result in
unnecessary doses to patients, personnel and public and overloading of the machine. The
parameters that affect the quality of the image include:

     1.      Applied tube potential (kV)
     2.      Quantity of radiation reaching the film, which depends on the current and time of
            exposure (mAs)
     3.     Focal spot size
 4.         Beam alignment
     5.     Congruence of optical and radiation fields
     6.      Contact between film and screen
     7.     Processing conditions

 The QA programme begins with the specification of performance of the equipment at the
                manufacturing stage (performance standards tests) and then includes the tests after
 installation in the hospital (acceptance tests) to ensure conformity with the specifications.
 The QA tests are carried out thereafter at regular intervals, after repairs that might affect
 performance and when equipment malfunction is suspected.

 The rate of film rejection - in other words, the number of retakes - may indicate inefficient
             operation and this should be periodically analyzed to ensure good QA. This could also help
 to identify performance deterioration, which requires service attention.

 The radiologists and the radiographers should be educated on the importance of the QA tests.
 The importance of obtaining good quality images keeping the doses to levels as low as
 reasonably achievable (ALARA) to patients, staff and public must be stressed.
 Simultaneously, requirements in respect of filtration, collimator, leakage radiation, safe work
 practices and proper installation planning must be fulfilled.

 The Q.A Tests as specified in the local radiation safety standards may be carried out. Please
 refer to your country's directives with regard to this.

    
                                                                  Troubleshooting

8. TROUBLESHOOTING

S. Fault Symptoms          Remedial Action
No.
1     Machine does not     Check the single-phase input supply at the mains switch/socket
   get 'ON'                Check F1 Fuse of 25 Amps. It may be blown. Replace the fuse if it
                           is blown.
                           Check the input supply at Terminal TS1-12 & TS1-11. It should be
                           230 V AC. If supply is not available at above terminals then wire
                           may be open between mains socket to Input terminals of control.
                           Switch OFF the machine from mains and then check the MCB, it
                           should show continuity between its terminals during ON position.
                           If MCB is not showing continuity then replace the MCB.
                           Check OFF Switch. It should show continuity between its contacts.
                           If multimeter does not show continuity then replace the switch.
                           Check the 230 V AC at the input of ON/OFF transformer.
                           Check the output of ON/OFF transformer at input terminals of
                           rectifier. It should be 12-0-12 & 0-12 Volts AC. If output is not
                           available then replace the transformer.
                           Check the input at J1-1 & 2 of Power Supply Card it should be
                           12V and at J1-8 & 9 it should be 12 V AC. Check the output at J2-
                           1 & 2 of Power supply Card it should be 12V DC & J2-8 & 9 is
                           should be 12V DC. If output is not available then replace the Card.
                           Check the ON/OFF Relay whether it is getting energized or not. If
                           relay is not getting energized then relay coil may be faulty i.e.
                           open. Replace the relay.
                           Check the ON/OFF Relay series with Variac A contact. It should
                           show continuity when checked with multimeter by pressing the
                           contacts manually. If multimeter is not showing continuity then
                           replace the Relay (Coil may be OK but contacts are faulty).
                           Common point of Variac contact D may be open from ON/OFF
                           relay's contact B.
2     Fuse F1 blowing      Tube head may be faulty and drawing heavy current. P1-P2 current
      OFF                           should draw maximum 33 Amps. When checked with Tong Tester
          (F1 is the Mains at full load i.e. 100 mA station. This fault will only occur during
      fuse of 25 Amp.)     exposure.
                          mA meter may be faulty i.e. showing less mA at the time of
                           calibrating the machine. This can only happen at 100 mA station.
                           LINE & NEUTRAL on ON/OFF Relay may be short with each
                           other. Contacts of ON/OFF Relay may be short inside the relay.

    Page35

                                                                        Troubleshooting

3     Fuse F2 blowing         Filament supply i.e. F1 & F2 wires may be touching with ground
      OFF                     or short with each other.
      (F2    is   Filament
      supply fuse of 4
      Amp.)       blowing
4     Fuse F4                 LBD supply wires may be short. Check the connector also for any
      OFF                    shorting of wires and check the edge connector's 5 & 6 pin of Time
      (F4 is                 Dealy Card.
      LBD/Collimator          Check LBD bulb holder. It should not give continuity with ground
      fuse of 4 Amp.)         Check for shorting of LBD supply wires with grounding due to
                             cracks or cuts.
 5     Exposure       starts  Check X-Ray switch on the Control Panel or in hand switch. It may
       when       Ready  is be short.
      pressed                   Check Exposure SSR relay contacts particularly Exposure Relay-A
                              contact with multimeter. It may be short.
 6     Machine not            (i) Check filament supply between TS1-1 (F1) & TS1-2 (F2). It
       exposing on any mA                should be approximately 150 V AC and on pressing ready
       station                 switch voltage should boost by 50 + 10 volts. If filament supply
                               is not available at above terminals then:
                               a Fuse F2 may be blown.
                                          Common band of filament resistance of 750 Ohms may be
                                    dry soldered or open.
                                c)
                                            Check common wires of Relay Card at J2-7, 1 & 2 for

                                d) proper connection
                                             Check the output at TS2-5 & 6 of CVT Transformer, it
                                    should be 230V AC.
                              (ii) If filament supply is available at Terminal strips TS1-1 w.r.t
                                 TS1-2 then check filaments physically for glowing in the tube.
                                At 25 mA, 50 mA and 100 mA stations, filament should glow.
                              (iii) If filament is not glowing then:
                                (a)      Check filament voltage between F1 & F2 at terminals on
                                      Tube Head. If supply is available at above terminals then
                                        follow next step otherwise check wiring between Control
                                     and Tube Head. F1 or F2 wire may be broken.
                               (b)        Either Filament transformer may be faulty inside tube
                                          head or Filament may be open inside tube. Replace the
                                    tube head.

    Page36

                                                                        Troubleshooting

                                 Check P1-P2 voltage during exposure at terminals TS1-6 & TS1-5.
                                 If P1-P2 voltage is not available then:
                                    (i) Check that whether P2 wire is connected properly at contact A
                                  of Variac.
                                   (ii) Check Exposure coil supply at its terminals. It should be 15 V
                                  DC. If supply is available then check whether Exposure Relay
                                  is getting energized or not. If it is not energized then replace
                                  Exposure Relay. Also check Exposure Relay-A contacts,
                                  whether they are working or not.
                                 (iii) Check the Exposure Relay on Relay Board
                                 (iv)If Exposure Relay's contacts are working properly and P1-P2
                                   voltage is not coming then, check common point of Variac
                                   Contact E. It may be disconnected.
                                If P1-P2 is available at Tube Head and exposure is not taking
                                 place, then replace the tube head, as H.V. Transformer or Rectifier
                                 diode may be faulty inside tube head.
 7     mA meter                  Tube may be gassey. To check this, remove F2 from Tube Head
       overshooting              and make exposure at 50mA/60 KVP. If blue light is visible in tube
                                then tube is gassey.
                                Tube head may be defective. Some connection in Tube head may
                                 be short from inside.
                                 mA meter may be defective. To check this, make exposure at 55
                                 KVP & 50 mA. Measure P1-P2 current. It should be around 17
                                 Amperes. If current is around 17 Amps on tong tester then mA
       MCB 16 Amp.               meter is defective.
 8     Tripping                 Calibration may be wrong if machine is delivering more mA than

        continuously         specified at full load.
                                 mA meter may have error.
                                 Tube head may be drawing high current
                                 MCB may be defective. Check if MCB is tripping under normal
                                conditions also.
9       Voltage       drop is    Under normal calibration conditions voltage drop should not
        more than specified      exceed 10% of the available voltage at full load. If voltage drop is
      limit.                     more then check the wires used for supply to machine These
                                 should be of appropriate gauge. Also check the Line Resistance. It
                                 should not be more than 0.4 Ω as per Indian Electricity Distribution

10    X-Ray           contactor  Rules. More the line resistance more will be the voltage drop.
      chattering        on Also check the Exposure Relay-A contact if it is working properly.
      pressing          X-Ray
11     switch
       mA output suddenly        Problem may be due to the rectifier open in the tube head.
        drops to half of the    Tube may be faulty.
        set values               mA meter may be defective.

    Page37

                                                                         Troubleshooting

12      Exposure       taking  Check for spark gap of mA & GND. Terminals may short through
      place but mA meter       mA & GND strips. There should be approx lmm Gap between
      does not show any mA & GND strips.

13     deflection              mA meter may be defective.
       Exposure does not       Check the micro controller at Pin No. 15, the supply should be 0V
       terminating at all on  when exposure.
       all mA stations         If common point of Wirings dry solder, solder it properly
                               Servo Final Card may be defective.
14     LBD Bulb not            Check fuse F4. It may be blown
      glowing                  Check LBD supply at LBD connector. It should be 24 V AC. If it
                               is not coming then wires from control to LBD may be broken.
                               Check the ON-OFF toggle switch provided on LBD. It may be
                               open.
                               Check the LBD Bulb. It may be fuse
                               Check the contacts of LBD bulb with the bulb holder. Remove the
                               carbon deposited on contacts with the help of sand paper
15     Centering of light &    For centering of light & X-Ray beam the position of LBD bulb
      X-Ray beam is not should be horizontal.
      proper                   Shift the light beam towards X-axis with two screws provided on
                              LBD (If required).
                               Shift the light beam towards Y-axis by adjusting it with the help of
                               LBD bulb itself (If required).
                               Always use the LBD bulb with tilted filament not with straight
                               filament to get the sharp and clear edges.
                               Adjust the cross with centre by loosening the four screws provided
                               on LBD brackets and moving the Glass in desired direction
 16    X-Ray quality is not    Check the dark room conditions, i.e. there should not be light
      proper                   leakage in dark room.
                               Check the developer and fixer solution quality
                               If calibration is not proper, then also the image quality will be
                              poor.
                              If there is major spot on the anode side of X-ray tube.
                              Films used should not be foggy and the intensifying screens in
                              cassettes should be clean.
 17   Machine is not           Check if OFF Switch is permanently short
        getting OFF            If ON/OFF relay 'C' contact is sticky then machine will remain
                               OFF only when we press off switch and becomes ON again when
                               we release off switch.
                              If ON switch is directly short.
 18     Electric Shock on      Improper ground may lead to this condition
        Touching Machine       Any live wire may be touching the body of machine.
                               Check all the wires going to tube head, bucky for any cut on
                               insulation. & Routing of these wires through the sharp edges

    Page38

                                                        Post Installation Instructions

9. POST INSTALLATION INSTRUCTIONS

9.1 The Party Code stickers and our Contact Numbers should be pasted on the equipment as
per the place specified.

9.2 Technic chart should be fixed near the machine and operator/customer should be
explained the Technic chart.

9.3 The Service Engineer should demonstrate the equipment to the operator. The operator
should be given training on essential Do's and Don'ts like ---

 a. Use as much of Shielding material as possible, use lead screens, lead aprons, lead
 goggles and shields etc.
 b. Radiation Dose should be as low as reasonably achievable
 c. Use collimators/cones and collimate radiation field to the smallest possible area.
 d. Before giving an exposure for the first time in the day, try to warm up the
        equipment for 10-15 minutes. For this purpose simply switch ON the machine and
 leave it as it is.

9.4 The Equipment should be handed over to the customer. The Installation Report should be
properly filled along with the Warranty Card and required Serial Nos.

    
                                                 Dark Room Procedures & X-Ray Film Processing

10. DARK ROOM PROCEDURES & X-RAY FILM
  PROCESSING

Dark Room Procedure:

To obtain the best results from the X-Ray Machine, following procedure should be observed in Dark
Room: -

 1. A qualified and trained Radiographer should only be allowed to operate the
  X-Ray Equipment.
 2. Dark Room should be totally dark and no light should enter in the room.
  3. Loading and unloading of films in the cassette should be done only in Dark Room under standard
  safe light.
  4.Films should be stored in Dry and Dark place.
  5. The Intensifying screens should be handled with care and wet finger marks of any chemicals
  should not touch the screens.
 6. The Developer and the Fixer solutions should always be covered and preferably new solutions to
  be prepared after every 2Months or after developing 250 Films whichever is earlier.
 7. The Temperature of Developer and Fixer to be maintained between 25 to 30 Degrees.
         8. Solutions should be stirred with wooden stick each time films are dipped. Separate wooden
  sticks, each for developer and fixer should be used.

X-Ray Film Processing:

  1. Open the exposed cassette in the Dark Room.
 2. Take out the exposed film and fix it in the hanger of suitable size.
  3. Dip the film in the Developer. After about 15 seconds take out the film from the Developer to
      visually observe the Developing status. Dip it again and take out to monitor the development as
  frequently as possible.
4.Take out the film from the Developer tank after it is fully developed.
  5. Dip the film in water to rinse all traces of developer on the film
  6. After proper rinsing, dip the film in the fixer. Let it be dipped in fixer for 5 Minutes.
7.Dip the film in running water to rinse and remove all the fixer from the film.
  8. Dry the film either in open place or in film drier.

                                                     
                                      Radiation Monitoring & Protection

 11. RADIATION MONITORING & PROTECTION

11.1 Personnel Monitoring
      Personnel monitoring is the evaluation of radiation doses received by the personnel
working with radiation.
The most commonly used personnel monitoring device is the film badge, which consists
 of a personnel-monitoring film (PM Film) kept in cassette containing a set of filters. With
 film badge, a wide range of doses from 10 mRem to 1000 Rem of different types of
 radiation cab be evaluated. The film serves as a permanent record and if worn on chest,
 gives the most representative value of whole body dose under normal working
conditions.
 The radiation dose received by radiation worker can also be determined by the use of
 Thermoluminescent dosimeter (TLD) badge. This consists of three CaSO4: Dy TLD
 discs embedded in a metallic framework and enclosed in a multi filter cassette. The TLD
 badge can be used to monitor Beta, Gamma and X-Ray radiations. The TLD badge can
 cover a wide range of doses from 10 mRem to 1000 Rem.
In addition to PM Film & TLD Badge, radiation dose to personnel can also be assessed
 by pocket dosimeters. Pocket dosimeters are very useful in certain operations, where the
radiation levels vary considerable and may be quite hazardous. They give on the spot
 check of radiation doses.
 It is always advisable that personnel handling the X-Ray machine should use TLD
 badges, PM Films or other devices like Pocket Dosimeters to monitor the absorbed dose
 within the safe limits.

 11.2 Radiation Protection Accessories

It is advisable to all personnel handling X-Ray machines to use following radiation
 protection accessories:

  Lead Goggles
  Protective Barrier
  Lead Apron
  Lead Gloves
  Thyroid Shield
  Gonad Shield

    
                               Preventive Maintenance Procedure

12. PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE

    Preventive Maintenance of any equipment is very important to keep it in proper working
    condition through out its life span. Timely and proper Preventive Maintenance not only
increases the life of the equipment, but it reduces the down time, hence savings on otherwise
expensive repairs. We must therefore try to be disciplined as far as the time schedule and the
         procedure for carrying out the P.M. is concerned. The details given below would give
   guidelines of P.M. procedure. P.M on all the equipments must be performed every 6 months
i.e.: twice a year.

          For optimum output of the equipment we should start writing the voltage drop during
       exposure at Average working KVP Time and mA settings. This record at the time of
installation itself can be mentioned on the Machine History Card. The date and month of
    Installation would help us actually know the extent of voltage drop as our experience
  suggests that during the summer season; the voltage drop is on the higher side. During P.M
    the Voltage drop can be checked with the reference value and is noted. Any increase in
Voltage Drop would thus be noticed and line checked for any loose connections etc. in the
mains switch/pole etc.

Inform customer in advance about your visit preferably through a letter/ telephone and agree
for a convenient time and date.

    
                                                      Preventive Maintenance Checkpoints

   13. PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE CHECKPOINTS

 The following preventive maintenance procedure may be adopted for carrying out all P.M.
   on the X-Ray Equipments.

  A) GENERAL:
   Whenever visiting for any Preventive Maintenance, please ensure to carry all the Tools.
   Meters, Grease, Lubricants, Machine History Card and consumables like the dusters, polish
  etc. Please make sure that your Multimeter is calibrated with a Standard Meter lying in your
 Branch Office.
        1. On reaching the Customer's site enquire from Operator/Doctor for any specific
         problems they are facing with the equipment.

        2. Rectify first the problems as indicated by the customer and then proceed as under for
         carrying out the Preventive Maintenance

 B) PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE PROCEDURE (ELECTRICAL)

1.      Before attempting to carry out the P.M. switch ON the equipment and check the
         working of the Machine electrically and mechanically. Observe for any flaws, which
         should be rectified during the course of P.M.
2.       Observe all the Electrical/Mechanical/Radiation precautions while performing the
        P.M.
3.       Switch OFF the Main Switch, open the cover and tighten any loose contacts/screws.
         Also check the fuse wire Rating and it must comply with the Rating of the equipment
         in operation.
 4.      Open the control panel cover. Keeping the Machine in "OFF" condition tighten all the
         screws on the Terminal Blocks/Resistance Taps etc.
5.       Check the rating of all the Glass Fuses and replace if necessary.
  6.     Open cover of X-Ray / Line Contactors and check that contacts are not worn out or
         burnt. Check the operation of the X-Ray contactor. It should not be sticky.
 7.      Make the Machine "ON" and check the accuracy of the Voltmeter (On Red Band
         your Multimeter should read 230 Volts).
8.       On "NO LOAD" check the Accuracy of Timer with the cycle counter/ stopwatch.
9.       Giving exposure at 65-70 KVP, check the mA output of Machine at different mA
         Stations and calibrate the mA output if required. Calibration of the mA Meter should
         also be verified with your Multimeter. Check P1-P2 current at this time. Observe for
         any abnormal behaviour of the Machine i.e. sparking, sounds from the Tube Head,
         H.T. Tank, Mains Switch etc. Visually cheek the Voltage drop on your Voltmeter.

    
                                           Preventive Maintenance Checkpoints

It should be within 10%. In case it is on the higher side, check if the wiring used in
        the mains is of appropriate thickness. Advise the customer accordingly.
        Also check the filament supply during the exposure. It should remain steady. If not,
        adjust booster resistance settings.
10.     Check the working of the Line and X-Ray contactors and clean the core and the
        contacts of the X-Ray contactor.

C) MECHANICAL

    1.     Check all the movements of Tube Head, Tube Stand and Tables. Check for
           functioning of all locks and ensure that all movements are smooth and noiseless.
           Specially check for Vertical Carriage Up/Down Movement. Rectify wherever
           required. Remove old grease with cloth and apply fresh grease on all movement areas
           (wherever applicable).
    2.     Open the Table Top and brush out all the dust settled on the Grid and on the Bucky
           Motor Area. Clean, apply lubricant and check the Bucky play, it's lock and tighten al
           nuts/bolts/screws in the Table.
    3.     You must ensure that the alignment of the Center Ray of Light Beam diaphragm
           matches with the Table center and Bucky center (Adjust if required).
4.         Now check for Air Bubbles in Tube Head and ensure that all wires/cables on Tube
          Head are tight. Check for bellow condition and any oil leakage. Ensure that the gap
           between mA & G Plate is maintained at 2mm.

 X-RAY /LIGHT BEAM/ ALIGNMENT

1.     Check and perform X-Ray/ Light Beam Alignment
2.     Check the LBD Bulb's mounting and orientation. Incase LBD Bulb's are fusing quite
       often check the voltage if the voltage supply is on the higher side, reduce input
       voltage to LBD Bulb.
3.     Check the smooth movement of the LBD Shutters.

E) CLEANING POLISHING

      1. Clean the machine with dry cloth and for the stubborn stains, use cleaning agent and
       polish. Do not allow any liquids to step in the control and other Electrical Areas.

    
Preventive Maintenance Checkpoints

 DARK ROOM
Check the Dark Room and its accessories for the following:
1.No light leakage in the Dark Room.
2.Safe light is of proper intensity.
3. Films used should not be beyond the expired dates.
4Cassette locks are not loose.
 5. Screen Quality should be OK and no staining of the screens.
 6. Developer and the fixer are fresh and their temperature is maintained properly
 7. Wooden sticks are available for stirring of the Developer and fixer.
 8. Radiographer/Operator is trained to handle Dark Room Accessories.

 GENERAL

1. Enquire if radiographer/Operator needs any training for use of equipment & impart if
necessary.
2. Handover Equipment to customer.
3. Explain/show equipment to customer, apprise him of jobs undertaken
4. Fill Machine History Cards and get the card/report signed from customer.
5. Inform tentative date of next Preventive Maintenance.